Mutating data, I think I slightly talked
about this when we did the API stuff.
But I just left a little note on this
because I didn't want people going to look
for different ways on how to do this.
Basically, mutating data right now which,
let's just describe mutating data,
this just means I'm changing something
on the database, I'm posting,
I'm deleting, I'm updating,
I'm making a change to the database.
I'm leaving it in a different state
than before my request was made, so
that's a mutation, right?
You're probably only gonna
do that on a client.
And the way you would have to do that is
basically the exact same way you do it
now, there's really no difference.
They're working on a RFC for
mutating data.
If you look at it here,
they have this really crazy example of
how to refresh your data,
and I'll talk about that.
But we're probably not gonna dive into
it cause I think it's so complicated and
they're just gonna have a better
solution anyway, really soon.
But at the end of the day,
when you make a mutation to a database,
either you're gonna need the refresh data.
Let's say you have a list of to dos and
you update one of the to dos,
you're gonna want that list of to
dos in your pace to update, right?
What Next.js is recommending is
that you just refresh the router,
which will trigger the whole
server component relationship.
And depending on your validation strategy,
we either go get the new one or
not, that's what they're suggesting.
So that's one approach.
The other approach is, you're mutating it,
but the current view you're looking at or
any view doesn't really need the data.
For instance, you might be having a form
where someone can sign up or sign in.
There's nothing waiting, there's no UI
there on that page that's waiting for
the result of that.
So you don't have to really do a refresh
because there's nothing waiting,
cuz you're gonna probably
go to the next page.
Was it gonna go get the user anyway, so
you don't have to do a refresh there.
So only if you're on the same page
where there's some UI that's depending
on the changes that you just made.
What your mutation, do you need
to do a refresh using the router,
which is what they recommend here.
I'm only showing you for a quick
second because it is very complicated.
I did not want to explain all this crazy
nonsense and I also, again, think,
based off the information that I've heard
from them and what they see on this page,
this won't be here too long.
They're already working on a better
process, but it's worth mentioning.
I don't want you to not know what that is,
but, yeah, that's happening.
So mostly, for the most part,
use whatever you are using.
If you need to refresh the page, to get
the new data, just do router dot refresh,
which will trigger your server
components to go do what they do.
They go get data, and they will get
the latest data, so, that's it.
>> I'm just curious.
Would it be possible to do
pagination with a server component?
It seems like that might be something else
that we need to handle the client side to
keep track of the various pages you're on.
>> Yeah, so the question was, can you
do pagination with server components?
Yes, you can.
>> So I think the way you
would have to do that is,
cuz you can refresh what page you're on,
server side,
I guess it really depends on
how you do pagination, right?
There's cursor-based.
So cursor-based is like,
I left off here cuz I sorted
in our filter I left off here.
But there's the other one where it's
just like, how's the other one work?
It's like you put a placeholder.
You have, here's where I left off,
I'm making my own index, and
I'm gonna tart off from here.
Because it depends on what you need to
pass on the URL, are you passing some
cursor on your URL, is your pagination
state living up here somewhere?
Because then that would
make it a dynamic URL.
And then a dynamic URL depending on that,
you will probably have to go to the server
to get that data ahead of time and
things like that.
So I think you can still get
away with doing it server side.
Because you can get the pagination
data using a database query like,
how many things I have left?
And then you can leverage
client side specifically for
just the interaction of
going to the next page.
So I still think you can totally do it,
but it will be challenging, but possible.
I'm trying to think of this website.
I was working with his website
where I take scenarios where
it looks like you can't do it with just
server, and do it with just server.
Cuz I do think for the most part,
you can get away with a lot of stuff with
just server as long as it's not
specific DOM animation stuff.
But when it comes to data fetching, I'm
gonna say most of the time, 90% of time,
that's all you need.
Yeah, I think you could do
that on the server side.
You just gotta go a little creative.
You might actually at the store you're
like, what page you're on in a cookie or
something like that.
So then you can see it every
single service I call like,
what page am I on in this cookie?
And that way you're just
keeping track of that page.
So there's definitely ways around it,
but it's not easy.